---
title: Beginning of a Treatise on Cognitive Matter
date: 2016-12-29
author: Akiva Lipshitz
layout: post
---

This little work is representative of the early stages of a larger
theory being formed from nothing. The components of this thought are
related to each other in deep and possibly hidden ways. I sense greater
dimensions of depth of the nature of this work which I shall not go into
for lack of time.

This is a window into the fruits of my thought over the past few months.
I grope around in the dark trying to develop a fundamental appreciation
for the nature of ideas and the intellect. In other words, I’m drawing
intellectual graffiti. There is no set order or structure and no axiom
guarding against contradiction. This attests to the fluid nature of this
essay. After some time a global thought structure will emerge which I
will then use as the face of the society of ideas presented within. The
emergence of a unitary global character will impel a phase change and
cause the ideas to spontaneously self-organize into something coherent
and cogent.

Commentary on the nature of this emerging work
==============================================

Were I to spend more time thinking deeply about this all and developing
it further, this work would evolve into a philosophy and theory of
cognition/psychology. The rigorous phase will be finding my axioms, the
conditions of all these theorems and the precise definitions of all
ambiguous terminology.

Formalizing this work will necessitate having intuition for all that
which it does not cover and trying to cover it to the best extent
possible. In conclusion, I need a theory of how to make this work
comprehensive.

Consider the logical–intellectual-theoretical as well as the
practical-psychological-emotional components of all ideas in this work.

There are few traces of religion in these ideas – as they are meant to
be universal ideas for guiding thought and shouldn’t use religious
arguments.

The most daunting thing on my mind is that remarkable work only comes
through remarkable effort, considerable commitment and iterative
development, not spontaneous ideating and interest. Problems are hard
and the learning process to be able to solve them is hard too. The scale
of magnitude between being a beginner and being able to solve real
problems is overwhelming for me. And that big things take time means you
can’t just start something new. You need to have already worked on
something for a while.

The response to this is that growth comes as a result of accumulation of
small success. With only a few successes the delta is tremendous.

Aposteriori Note
================

A few minutes of total exploration leads me to an understandable but
negative truth – that all these issues have been thought about before.
Negative because some part of me hoped I would be saying something
useful, positive because it confirms I’m thinking in the right
direction.

Rationality Deltas
==================

I'm starting to notice ways I can enhance my rationality or make
optimizations to my own way of perceiving the world. Instead of throwing
away these valuable opportunities for growth, I'm going to keep note of
them:

**General Equations**

**Rationality Delta**

**Actionable Insight**

1.  **Actionable insight is more valuable than the general theories**:
    applications of general theories are hard to compute. Possibly, an
    application of a general theory can be as novel or even more novel
    than the theory itself. General theories are usable to the extent
    they can be used to solve particular problems. The mapping from
    problem to theory necessary for it to be solved is not
    always trivial.

2.  **Analyze very carefully:** beware unforeseen nuance.

3.  **Be aware of skillset categories:***Don't assume interacting with
    thing A will enhance the depth of your interaction with B; even if
    both are in the same category intellectually they can be in
    different categories behaviorally. For example, having a good
    mathematical intuition doesn't mean you are an expert at
    symbol manipulation.*

4.  **Be aware of what you do not know:** and don't suppress the truth
    or the facts to aid your position. Try to build your position from
    an absolute perspective as the Gemara does.

5.  **Don't initialize my essays with a random anchor word or clause.**
    I've noticed when I write essays I fumble on the introduction.
    Instead of contemplating how best to begin the essay from an
    ideological perspective my brain searches for random words and tries
    to evolve from that word a topical sentence. This process usually
    brings me to a local minimum in terms of writing optimality.

6.  **Don't prematurely invalidate your opinion**: the hava amina may be
    correct even if your intuition says otherwise (tosphot assumes there
    is no blanket rule for *“Shave Kesef KiKesef”* in his long comments
    on *“Pruta U’Shave Pruta”* on the first daf of kiddushin, but
    *Meharsha* questions this implicit assumption Tosphot seems not to
    pay attention to).

7.  **Don't unnecessarily tell people about what you've done**: it comes
    across as bragging and their trust can be won over through less
    blunt means.

8.  **Don’t fear destroying things you’ve built**: to escape a local
    minimum you need to make stochastic jumps. This means forgetting
    about where you are now and choosing a completely new direction to
    go in.

-   **Don’t just say you’ll figure it out**

    -   **Eg**: **human medical knowledge, the United States of America,
        the scientific method. We wake up into these realities that were
        once non extant.**

10. **Either abolish or fully capture hazy intuitions:** so I can be
    extremely particular about my ideas. So that it is clear precisely
    what my point is. And so that I know which ideas are real and which
    stem from a superficial understanding.

11. **Embrace Approximation, Know when Perfection is Unnecessary**: One
    of the strongest abilities that comes with expertise is the ability
    to accurately gauge the complexity of a project. This enables you to
    deliberately devote just enough energy to approximate optimal output
    while still conserving resources.

12. **Embrace Iterative Processes**: in my autodidactic pursuits I’ve
    noticed I jump frequently between disciplines and rarely get to the
    fundamental ideas in a textbook. Perhaps this stems from my needing
    the material as a means rather than an end. (However, there is a
    mistake in my approach for I haven’t yet the expertise to deeply
    make use of complex math. I need to master the art of thinking like
    a mathematician first and then all this will become first nature.) I
    feel somehow rushed and therefore make superficial brushes across
    large planes of mathematical ideas instead of investigating
    them deeply.

13. **Everything can be thought about to a depth of infinitude:**

14. **Focus: this should be the first one on my list**

15. **Initial solutions need not persist to be part of the
    ultimate solution.** One fallacy I have succumbed to is failing to
    update my existing perception in the presence of new inspiration. My
    mind had perceived what already existed as permanent or feared the
    possibility of exerting extra energy in deleting existing
    productions when I really could do better with a new understanding.
    This really comes down to having the courage to fundamentally refute
    initial or semi-initial hypotheses. For example: classical mechanics
    was broken at very small and large scales by quantum mechanics and
    general relativity.

16. **Intellectual Collaboration:** can be a path to more
    absolute truth. The exposure to unforeseen variables
    is enlightening. Additionally, it takes intellectual theory into
    practice in a society of thoughtful individuals each with their own
    intellectual theory.

17. **It is important not to develop philosophy using an intellectually
    absolute model of \[the state of\] the world:** developing a theory
    of meaning for instance can easily be built on the notion that every
    person has the capacity to create absolute impact. It’s really more
    nuanced than this and most people aren’t able to be outliers in the
    distribution of creating absolute impact. This statistical reality
    means a theory built on outliers wouldn’t be useful to **most** of
    the population – you wouldn’t know this if you didn’t realize your
    model is built on implicit absolutes.

18. **Jump into new things:** otherwise you risk never gaining momentum.

19. **Know what your biases are:** so you go towards an absolute truth
    and not a relative truth.

20. **Know where you are in the growth landscape:** (This is a non
    trivial corollary of the previous dictum) always be aware of what
    your growing goals are and whether your current and projected
    activities cultivate that which you seek to develop. Awareness of
    being in local maxima is important too to ensure you achieve your
    global growth potential.

21. **Maximizing production over consumption**. Optimal output in life
    comes from implementing not theorizing about how to implement or yak
    shaving and not actually implementing.

22. **Minimizing delay between having a hypothesis and testing it out:**
    theory alone won't do it; building and experimenting is the best way
    to make progress.

23. **Optimize mindset:** for optimal open-mindedness which *creates*
    more opportunity and brings with it happiness. For instance: assume
    professors want to hear your questions, or if in a new situation
    convince yourself you belong, convince yourself all problems are
    solvable, etc. Mindset, or the perspective you choose to view
    reality from can influence your experience in reality.

24. **Parsimony**

25. **Perceiving every problem as easy** until I learn it is hard

26. **Push yourself far beyond your comfortable limits, even to the
    point of braking.**

27. **Record where you learn things from:** so their sources are
    quotable in the future.

28. **Relentlessly pursue new heights:** it's really nice to struggle
    and eventually master a local skill. However, experts at any level
    can be challenged. Optimal growth productivity comes when you are
    always pushing forward.

29. **See universal abstractions**

30. **Setting processes in motion a priori**: a fallacy one can make is
    foregoing a potentially transformative experience on the basis it's
    fruit will only be born later in time and hence deciding it is not
    worthwhile to engage with that opportunity now when he could just as
    easily engage with it when the time comes. However, this is wrong
    because some truths are truer and advantages are advantageous and
    the most successful people give themselves advantages - asynchronous
    processes that aid them along the way.

31. **Step outside of myself when investigating my own work:** try to
    find fallacies and ask fundamental questions against it.

32. **Stimulate both the spirit and the intellect**

33. **Stop rounding time quantities**: so every moment counts. I've
    noticed improvement here. The idea is to maximize
    my production/consumption. Create more information than I take in.
    But with respect to time, every moment becomes valuable as a
    discrete piece of value and not a point in a continuous time
    manifold whose clusters shift as the hours change. Time is viewed as
    absolute and not relative to itself which would cause weird
    deformations in my relation of it.

34. **Structure in the world may subconsciously be altering the way you
    think**. Try to develop the most absolute perspective.

35. **Super Time Maximization**. Always be creating, writing, thinking
    not sitting around staring out the window.

36. **Urgency Fallacy on micro (life), macro (projects),
    nano(yak shaving)**

37. **When making estimations, make them reasonable:**

38. **Write down every single idea** I have the it enters my short
    term memory. It can decay and I would lose it. This would be the
    opposite of *hashovot aveida*, effectively stealing my own thoughts
    from my future self.

39. **Proportional Rationality Fallacy:** I’ve found myself making this
    so frequently not because it is a cognitive heuristic but because it
    is so hard to avoid; and would be present regardless of the level of
    intelligence of an individual so long as they are dealing with a
    problem proportionately hard. When the decision making process
    demends intense rationality, i.e. strong mental power (dW/dt) in the
    scientific sense of the word, it is very difficult to meet this
    standard perfectly and an individual is likely to only
    approximate it. To be clear (assuming cases of deliberate
    rationality): this fallacy suggests people tend only to approximate
    pure rationality when they are at their cognitive limits

40. **Choice Detachment Fallacy:** following from the *proportional
    rationality fallacy*, in cases that demand ones limits of
    rationality but where the decision making process is abstracted from
    the outcome, rationality will be undermined by the a of entropy
    because it is very hard to keep the system at absolute
    rationality maximum. The abstracted nature of the decision making
    reduces the incentive to exert that extra power needed to keep
    rationality at a maximum. IF this isn’t clear, I hope it
    approximates something that is clear.

41. **Lazy Rationality Fallacy:** giving examples, explanations, making
    connections, or insight that seems sound but having a hazy intuition
    that you are being imprecise.

42. **Easily being overwhelmed by complexity**

43. **Cognitve Load limits, how to we go beyond this?**

44. **Don’t just make arguments that seem to make sense to you because
    of the perspective from which they were formulated**

45. **Talking about things in the absolute when in reality they live
    along a spectrum**

46. **Allowing your own mental structure to reflect how the external
    notions it represents are structured/emphasized.**

On Intuition
============

-   Can have the tendency to overestimate the strength and reliability
    of one’s intuition

-   *I am interested in what distinguishes two types of understanding*.
    My present \[and hopefully temporary\] mathematical ineptitude
    prevents me from seeing the global picture in
    mathematical arguments. And hence, each time I want to understand
    the result I must recompute the proof. In contrast, complex ideas I
    have an intuition for already need not be recomputed each time I
    want to make sense of them. They are already deeply embedded in a
    mental framework; I can think and speak about them with ease and
    recognize them in all their manifestations. That is, I have an
    intuitive grasp for such complex ideas. *What is the process of
    acquiring a heuristic for complex ideas? How are these two types of
    understanding represented in the mind and what are their
    characteristics? What distinguishes an expert heuristic system from
    a novice heuristic system?*

Optimal Mindsets
================

*This is a list of perspectives that can enhance particular situations
if used correctly.* They are different perspectives on cost-benefit
analysis, and can be thought of as narrowly applicable rationality
deltas – they are only relevant in particular contexts

-   **Depth need not be found in the individual**: rather in
    the collective.

    -   Read [*Collective Intelligence of
        Life*](https://medium.com/emergent-future/the-connective-intelligence-of-life-41f4b31a3ef?source=reading_list---artificial_intelligence------7-4),
        Collective Memory in Psychology, etc.

    -   When you may become depressed that the depth of the individual
        is shallow

-   **If progress is an increasing function of effort on average**,
    maximizing effort maximizes progress over the long term. The short
    term JND is too small to feel like progress is actually being made.

-   **Because today’s problems are so complex, they can only be solved
    through remarkable effort and expertise.**

-   **We need to be prove something is not impossible to convince
    ourselves it is possible.** To prove something to be impossible, we
    must exhaustively search the entire space of options and prove every
    single one of them to be impossible. Only once we arrive at an empty
    set of possibilities is something really impossible. Even if it’s
    possibility is very, very small, enough energy will actualize it.

-   **Consider all matters always**. Otherwise, your perception and
    behavior will be derived from possibly inaccurate information
    (epistemological definition of knowledge). Determining the variables
    involved is not closed-form, so end your search after some
    dynamic threshold.

-   **ENTROPY IS NOT ON OUR SIDE:** in terms of mindset, depth of
    thought etc.

-   **Don’t rely on an intuitive grasp of a theory:** Theories are
    developed and optimized approaches to resolving particular issues.
    Assuming you understand a theory without first delving into its
    nuance is a self imposed failure-trap. If it were that obvious, the
    theory wouldn’t need to exist. So consider what the theory is really
    saying, what new understanding is it bringing to the table, *what is
    its nature?*

-   **Go beyond simplicity:** when you encounter a theory that seems
    simple, see beyond this simplicity and consider more nuanced
    situtations, how to apply the theory, how it can be expanded.
    Everything can be thought about to a depth of infinitude.

-   **Complex changes need iteration to converge on the change.** Rapid
    change is bad because it ignores nuance and this dissonance between
    nuance and the general nature of the new system will eventually
    undermine the change – the face is different than the core. This
    disparity will have random and possibly negative consequences.

-   **Complex systems are built on rigorous hierarchically
    organized detail.** Understanding x/n leafs doesn’t mean you
    understand n/n leafs because the (n-x) leaves you do not understand
    cannot be derived from the x leaves you have – by the definition of
    a leaf.

-   **Actionable Insight over General Theory:** it takes creativity to
    find use for generality. Finding applications of generality can be
    as innovative as the generality itself. So to create structure,
    enumerate over some applications of general theory or present the
    general theory in its applications. This is relevant to some of the
    very general rationality deltas, eg: *considering all matters,* or
    *know what your biases are*.

-   **Reality is Continuous not Discrete, A Frequency Distribution over
    States:** making assumptions is an inevitable part of the
    pre-rigorous phase of theory development. However, once the rigorous
    era begins and the theory begins to concretize, to take on a mature,
    solid form, to be stated as an absolute, the theory needs to realize
    that reality itself is not concrete, that structure in reality is a
    human conception, that there is nuance, there are shades of gray,
    that systems fluctuate and their nature is really a frequency
    distribution over a spectrum of other natures. When talking about
    theory, I mean an individuals’ own theory of their life, or their
    guiding principles and worldview.

-   **If existing structure impedes progress, work around or destroy the
    structure**

-   **Instead of “*yes or no”* questions, ask “*to what degree”*
    questions – don’t fall for the existence of dichotomies. It clouds
    reason and judgement**

-   **The integral of minor changes to the nature or class of one’s
    activities can be quite major**: this issue is a very broad and
    ubiquitous one. The face of complex systems emerges from a nonlinear
    average over the states of its constituents. Even the very smallest
    changes to routine, or the focus on detail results in nonlinear
    global effects.

-   **When dealing with new material which you only have a very
    superficial grasp of, expect the nature of the approximated
    understanding and skillset you will need to tackle the material. **

-   **Expect your own person meta-understanding to expand as you
    encounter new situations and forms of ideas which you will need to
    place into your mental structure. **

18. Any time you encounter a theory or construct, consider what other
    minimal formulation may produce exactly the same results as
    that construct. Eg: the Lagrangian function

Cognitive Bugs
==============

*This is my psychology class getting into my head. Here we’ll look at
bugs in human cognition. If fixed, they could lead to a far more
deliberate existence. However, it is very hard to maintain control over
these things because we tend to regress towards equilibrium cognitive
depth–mental energy until our cognitive depth catches up when our
psychological control becomes second nature.*

*The very problem is that there are bugs in our heuristic systems. Here
we’ll enumerate as many cognitive bugs and their respective fixes as I
can think of.*

*A general rule which is only useful if applied is that we should be
aware of our intellectual input and output and gauge whether the output
is within the range of a specific error bounds function. For example:
does our initial perception of a given situation make sense?*

*The problem is always going to be an optimization between time and
mental effort. We simply cannot extend 100% mental effort 100% of the
time so that we can logically analyze every step our mostly heuristic
cognition makes.*

**Established Bugs:**

- **Cognitive Load**

- **Availability Heuristic**

- **Representativeness Heuristic**

- **Familiarity Heuristic**

- **Confirmation Bias**

Theories to Develop
===================

*The Philosopher King has the following list of theories to develop on
his agenda. Why? Simply for the intellectual benefits of having a deeper
understanding of truths in the universe as perceived by the human
\[philosopher\]. This creates some useful heuristics to solve for a
global maximum in \[mission critical\] real world problems. It fosters a
mindset of deliberation, of considering all variables and all their
dimensions, the multidimensional landscape before making a decision.*

*NOTE: This list extends the post-its list entitled “Theories to
Develop”*

*P.S. These theories may be perpetually latent. It is uncertain if I’ll
ever actually want to spend time writing about all of these theories.
Time could be better spent getting directly closer to the goal of doing
something remarkably remarkable (Remarkability theory?)*

*This list can better be interpreted as a list of topics I am interested
in investigating while I have been unable to attend to them.*

1.  **Satisfaction vs Happiness theory:** when to stop climbing. Why?

-   **Legacy, Potential, Thinking Massive Theory**: becoming amazing
    like Elon Musk

    -   **What does it mean to spend your life dedicated to that which
        is not absolute?**

    -   **What does it mean that not all scientists will win a nobel
        prize?**

    -   **Isn’t your success ultimately random?**

    -   **What does this mean in terms of the secular theory of life?**

3.  **Orders of Magnitude of Mental Computation Theory**: what it takes
    to turn hazy ideas into something discrete and nuanced.

4.  **Theory Development Theory**: how theories are imagined and built
    into something, when are theories added to, what differentiates a
    theory from a collection of true ideas that incomprehensively covers
    a topic (this clause is ambiguous)

-   **Metatheory**: what the nature of a theory is, how it is used, what
    does it mean for a theory to be generalized, exhaustive vs
    non-exhaustive theories, and related issues.

    -   **Depth of Theory**: studying the nature of theories and their
        intellectual density

    -   **What is our working definition of the word *Theory*?**

6.  **Subjective Field theory:***eg: some subjectivities are greater
    than other subjectivities, finding subjective axes,
    operationalization of subjectivity–&gt;objectivity and inverse.*

7.  **Theory Worth Theory:***theories that exist only for themselves
    with, in practice, no applications.*

    -   Computed theories vs. BS Theories stemming from Armchair
        Speculation

    -   What does a set of ideas such as this one represent and to what
        extent are they valuable?

8.  **Development Theory**

9.  **Thought value theory**

    -   Rigor vs Creativity

    -   Art vs Science

    -   Solving hard problems, simple applications of complex ideas,
        complex applications of simple ideas. Eg: what is the value in
        simple physics derivations.

10. **Ultimate Reality Theory, Humanity Theory**

11. **Structure of Ideas theory**: how new ideas are built as a
    structured composition of others

    -   Conveyal of Ideas through language theory

    -   Mental Organization Theory

12. **Axiom and Definition theory**: becoming rigorous on
    subjective things. How to have these arguments. Useful for
    psychologists and consciousness debates (which theory holds) or for
    color blind people, etc. How argue with people who disagree with
    your axioms.

13. **Skill theory** (What is the nature of skills, what does having
    them mean, etc)

14. Individual and Collective Theory (what is the nature of the
    individual, the nature of the collective, the interplay of both, the
    worth of both)

15. **Expression theory**: what is the nature of human expression

16. **Recursivity Theory:** what is recursive logic, how to avoid or get
    around it? Self reference and what that means?

17. **Abstractability and Universality Theor**y: why are there
    universal themes. Why can everything be abstracted? Where do these
    categories come from? Do we create them or are they absolute.
    Questions of this nature plus some clarification and nuance.

18. **Persistency of Initial Mental Model Theory:** sometimes our
    initial intuitions are false (this should be a rationality delta).

-   **Question Theory:** what levels/types of questions are there? What
    differentiates a question from a lack of foundational knowledge or
    false assumptions.

    -   **Eg:** can we develop a philosophy of general questions? To
        what extent are general questions meaningful?

20. **Values Theory:** what levels of depth are there to the decisions
    people make about their values, how some value-systems are greater
    than others. The problem with being open minded in finding a
    value-system is that once you try one out it is unknown whether you
    feeling an attachment to it is for absolute reasons or because you
    have become conditioned to it. That people’s values change over time
    and how this connects to absolute values. **Social Values Theory**
    (Values Theory over a set of individuals).

21. **The Psychology Behind Motivation to Pursue Values and Behind How
    People Actually Choose Values.**

22. **The Theory of Existence:***What does it mean to exist? What does
    it mean for an idea to exist? What is meant by saying all ideas
    exist? What is meant by the so called idea-space where all ideas
    reside, irrespective of whether anyone had the idea? Is anything
    absolute or are the most fundamental mathematical axioms only
    existent in the human consciousness and are not matter in and of
    themselves? Do abstracted quantities of nature actually exist?*

23. **Theory of learning new things: how to develop an intuition
    for things.**

24. **Dimensions of Cognitive Matter Theory or Representation Theory:**
    constructs ought to only be thought of as absolutely meaningful if
    they describe the state of the system as it were actually manifested
    and not as some abstraction. That is, cognitive and physical matter
    exists in certain dimensions. Abstract dimensions have no meaning
    beyond the strictly theoretical role they play within a theory. For
    example: there is no explicit physical concept of energy. It is
    merely a theoretical model which can explain the limits of motion in
    a physical system in this universe. Or to speak of an abstract
    ideaspace as actually existing and then using this model to reason
    about other aspects of idea-theory is ridiculous. Ideas exist in the
    dimension of the human mind and no more than that. There is no
    abstract ideaspace. In other words **constructs only exist in the
    structures that sustain them.**

25. **Philosophy of Physics:** what does the existence of the
    possibility of derivations actually say about the structure of the
    universe and of the science? What does the fact that simple symbolic
    equations such as *F=ma* only work in certain situations – what is
    the bifurcation point and how does the symbolic equation just
    spontaneously change, or does the symbolic equation actually exist
    in some function space? Even the most general, abstract ideas about
    the universe must begin with *Assuming X is true, P(X, Y, Z,...)*

26. **Structure of the Universe:** certain truths are inherent in the
    structure of the physical world.

27. **Semantic Continuum Theory:** semantic or symbolic matter which is
    presented as a constant may actually be a function of state. This
    allows for certain theories to be context specific and introduces
    the possibility for theories to reorganize their predictions under
    different situations. It allows for a computational element to
    theories by giving them the intellectual scaffolding/structure to be
    formulated as a point or a function on a continuum as opposed to
    arrogantly being an ultimatum/constant. Putting theories in this
    meta-structure adds an essential bit of nuance. For example,
    classical mechanics is a state function of the level of abstraction;
    as I touched above in *Philosophy of Physics,* classical mechanics
    exists in a continuum of physical theories. An example of a theory
    formulated on the intellectual scaffolding of *Semantic and Symbolic
    Field Theory* is Social-Cognitive Psychology, which allows for
    behavior to be context specific. **Bifurcation points of
    symbolic fields. **

28. **Symbolic Field Theory:** the study of function spaces, symbolic
    bifurcations, the study of symbolic structures as the primary
    objects on which functions operate

29. **Formal-Semantic Translation Theory:** the theory of how
    cognitive**-**semantic matter can and ought to be translated to and
    from formal and rigorous formulations.

30. **Synthetic Complexity Theory:** those problems which do not need to
    exist but are created by humans. Essentially the entropy of the
    ideaspace is constantly increasing as new disorder is added to it
    by humans. I ask a problem in symbolic logic and I cause an increase
    in entropy. I create modern art, I increase entropy. This increase
    in entropy is synthetic from the absolute, existential perspective
    because the disorder (1) doesn’t necessarily exist if one doesn’t
    acknowledge its existence (representation theory), and (2) the
    disorder transcends purely nature disorder in the sense that it is
    in the ideaspace as opposed to the physical space. Therefore, the
    disorder is synthetic. This is really an opinion and an absolute one
    (which is not necessarily a good thing, see *Subjective Field
    Theory*)

31. **Meta-Social Theory or Human Interaction Theory:** the theory of
    the nature and absolute philosophical value of friendships and
    human interaction. Is it really meaningful or is it animal and is
    the ideal to be purely intellectual and focused on G-d? Are
    friendships philosophically meaningful or do they emerge from
    biological needs?

32. **Philosophical Poignancy Theory:***the set of metrics by which to
    weigh the so called absolute/philosophical value of matter which I
    keep mentioning throughout this paper. This theory also studies the
    semantic continuum in which philosophical poignancy metrics exist
    and when to apply which. *

Universal Laws
==============

It is fascinating that it seems some \[ possibly abstract and vacuously
true \] truths about the character of the universe may be discovered
with logic alone.

Axiom: The below *laws* are universally true under the axiom that their
axioms are independent of the human mind.

Were the above axiom not, these theorems would be vacuously true and so
would the axiom. Which is why it is required.

We must also define *law, universal, axiom* etc.

-   Systems are built from an arbitrary many number of smaller
    subsystems, making the supersystem very, very complex because it is
    built on nuance.

-   Cognitive Matter

-   Natural recursiveness. Think about it.

-   Punishment

-   Optimization, Increase in Disorder, Loss of Structure

-   Economics of Everything

-   Intelligence in nature

-   Networks

See <http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/laws-of-nature/>

**When manipulating a theorem is futile:** when looking at a particular
theorem, sometimes it is possible to manipulate the theorem in a way
that adds no additional information, or information that merely cancels
itself out. Ex: y+2=x. We can make this 3+y+2=x+3 – this manipulation
has added no information. However sometimes this manipulation is useful
insofar as we may have another truth that 3+y=4z. Now we know that
4z=x+3 without needing to manipulate the second expression. However, in
truth no new information was added because instead of manipulating the
first expression to conform, we could have added the second. So this
observation may be useful but for now serves the very purpose it
bemoans.

The Theory of Cognitive Matter
==============================

*All these ideas depend on axioms (see theory of existence), which I
will have to define in the future after I have them. Additionally, that
I am able to draw these conclusions without being able to
articulate their underlying axioms is a situation which I will also have
to analyze. A third question is that of the precision of ideas. I do not
think it is possible to ever define a pure idea, that is nothing more
and nothing less. There is always the possibility re/para-phrasing and
the original idea loses or gains meaning that may not match exactly the
emotion that was expressed in language by the person who originally had
the idea.*

**Philosophical Forms of Matter**

*Note: Plato has a*[*theory of
forms*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Theory_of_Forms)

Let me make a distinction. There exist two dimensions relevant to this
discussion (depending on your frame of reference, either from the
cognitive or physical universe, yes this is a recursive definition, I
think):

1\. **Physical **dimension and **physical** matter

2\. **Cognitive **dimension and **cognitive** mattter

It is easiest to explain physical notions from the frame of reference of
the cognitive universe. The mind is capable of perceiving the physical
universe and drawing conclusions pertaining to the nature of what it
observes. Such conclusions transcend the physical manifestation of the
observation. The Cognitive Decoder It is possible to depict a physical
reality mathematically, but the mathematical representation cannot
wholly describe the reality. It is limited to being capable of only
describing quantitative and computational truths. A higher level is that
of a conscious observer who can comprehend neuronally
encoded information. This ability I will call cognitive touch .

Cognitive matter (which is cognitive matter) has two forms (which are
the cognitive representations of the Philosophical Forms of Matter )

-   **Form A: Cognitive representations of physically manifested
    matter** - the derivatives of expression of ideas through language.
    Everything else is

-   **Form B: Cognitive representations of matter that transcend
    physical reality.** Theoretical math falls in this category, verbs,
    nouns, math, adjectives, etc. This is all fascinating because this
    articulation of ideas, in fact this very sentence and my using the
    word articulate in it, lies at the fusion of the cognitive and
    physical universes, is cognitive matter expressed in a purely
    cognitive form.

You can talk about cognitive matter in cognitive matter --&gt;
conclusion. Therefore, it is possible to reason and arrive at
conclusions about physical truths in a purely cognitive way, which is a
powerful idea. But this ability has its limits. Therefore, any
simulation of a neuronal network will always be incomplete. The neuronal
information are quantitative truths but quantitive truths cannot
themselves transcend the barrier of physicality. The physical
cannot somehow transplant itself into the cognitive dimension - i.e
objectivity enter subjective realm.

**Awareness/Cognitive Depth** What differentiates two seemingly
different worldview’s can merely be matter of awareness or cognitive
depth. Humans automatic ability to formulate things (reflex, not
deliberation), and subconscious meaning embedded in the text (see
Shakespeare’s Merchant of Venice, 2.3.5 Jessica ). You need computation
to comprehend language.

**Lifetime Value of an Idea** The physical and cognitive dimensions can
alter each other through the human. How can you estimate how valuable
cognitive matter is? In some part by how large a change it induces in
the physical dimension. Similarly, how do you estimate the value of
physical matter? In some part by how large a change it induces in the
cognitive dimension. Infinite

**Extrapolation** How deep do ideas go? See awareness/cognitive depth ,
limitations of thought as language . Writer vs Reader. How deep a
meaning can be embedded in a text before it starts to become you and not
the text? Good vs Bad ideator

**The Universality of Abstraction of Information**

**The Universality of Matter Composed of Smaller Parts**

**The Limitations of Thought as Language **

-   relating to representation theory

**Do Ideas actually Exist:** Sematic vs Literal meaning (symbol vs
intuition)

Now another question is what is the resolution of language is? How well
can it approximate an underlying emotion. What is language? Look into
the work of Nicholas Georgalis: {}

**Psycho-Philosophical Ideaspace:**

-   There is no such thing as an ideaspace – it is all the human
    psychology space

-   Ideas are just as they manifest themselves in the human mind.
    That's it. There is no tangible *idea*, they are just expressions of
    relations among entities which themselves dont exist. So boo-hoo to
    kant's *ideaspace* and the space that I mentioned in my *Treatise on
    Cognitive Matter*

-   Arguments on matters of definition – such as the question of
    machine creativity.

-   Dealing with this new psycho-philosophical ideaspace, how do we
    understand the nature of different levels of abstraction?

1.  Recent results from *metatheory* propose theories are built from the
    integration of detail, not approximate generalizations. Detail and
    nuance build a theory which can solve the whole spectrum of problems
    that actually exist, not the bug-free ones generalizations can.

2.  The human *abstraction heuristic* serves us well in many cases. In
    absolute terms, *abstraction* can be to the detriment. For example:
    say you are reading
    [this](http://www.ams.org/journals/bull/2016-53-04/S0273-0979-2016-01544-8/S0273-0979-2016-01544-8.pdf)
    article about graviation waves and realize you lack the math
    background to understand it fully. So you realize you need to learn
    about *manifolds* – but maybe you really don't need to know about
    just *manifolds*. Maybe you really need to know a very particular
    detail or theorem involving manifolds. Because as an autodidact you
    tend to fall into the pathfinding trap, getting ever deeper and
    deeper into a wikipedia train. You want to take a moment to think
    about what the first node is and come to manifolds from there, not
    start at manifolds and go outwards.

-   Essentially what I’m trying to get across here is that ideas may be
    looked at only as what they are and not some translation of them
    into a nonexistent, abstract philosophical space. This ties to the
    culture theory of language.

-   **Nuance**: Relating to this humanistic understanding of the nature
    of a thought: we should investigate the relationship between the
    organization of a complex theory which synthesizes many smaller
    *chiddushim* during its development and when the logical order is
    shifted around for clarity of presentation. What is the difference
    between these two structures of the idea – to what extent are they
    the same idea? What does it say about what complex ideas really
    are (i.e. that they are fundamentally human constructions), and et.
    cetera. As an example, the Gemara invites you into the process of
    developing halacha instead of stating the chakira and ultimate
    resolution; it is not clean and can be quite confusing as nothing is
    ever certain until the resolution. There are hazy intuitions, false
    assumptions, an incredible amount of pathfinding/computation that
    must be done to arrive at a conclusion. The ideological structure of
    Torah and Halacha itself is evident in the fact Gemara is designed
    this way.

**In establishing an understanding of the relationship between our
subjective conscious experience and the external reality, it is
important to have a philosophy about how real ideas and emotions are –
in what ways are ideas and emotions real?**

The Nature of Art
=================

-   Synthetic complexity argument – lacking absolute meaning?

-   Perspectives on reality, express an idea requiring computation?

-   Evoke emotion?

-   Transactional, Psychoanalytic and Deconstructionist approaches

-   When a work should be studied. You see something someone random
    wrote — should you study it?

-   Use story about famous guy who said don’t study my work. Is it the
    art or the artist? Solve this chicken and egg problem

-   The limit of subjectivity is objectivity

-   Synthetic complexity, exercise in futility, only in intellectual
    realm is it relevant. Solving intellectual problems.

-   Art as an intellectual problem (and its flaws) and as not well
    defined

-   The argument that art is beautiful is included in the premise of
    synthetic complexity theory.

-   Address the recursive nature of this story and how I have the
    ability to make fun of artists because I am operating at a higher
    level than they.

-   `A = interpret(interpret(art))`, where `A` is this essay.

-   Why the universe is like a piece of art and mathematics is an
    interpretation of the universe

-   Why two diametrically opposed views can exist in harmony - why my
    arguing this is also going to be pointless, but it is necessary.
    There will always be someone from another viewpoint who has a
    different opinion. Therefore, I must address the nature of
    subjective argument itself and why it is not futile.

-   Address the fact that any piece of literature needs to be viewed as
    pure objectivity.

-   Not that one shouldn’t engage in art, but because of this argument,
    it is much deeper to study objective things.

On Society
==========

*To change the fabric of society and make it more absolutely meaningful.
We want to create **a society of depth, of thoughtfulness, of meaning**
at the level of the individual and at the level of the collective. What
is best for us as human beings – in practical. It wouldn’t be ok to
force change. We need to be pluralistic and understand the theory of
subjective fields, but also take into account that some subjectivities
are greater*

Societies can be thought of as complex systems on random variables. They
have local and global dynamics emerging from the behavioral and
cognitive tendencies of the individuals that constitute them.

-   The deep theory of culture: going to the level of the individual’s
    conscious connection to their values, their behavior in relation to
    these values, how details of the individual comes to define a
    broader general culture, how cultures interact, how disagreeing
    cultures interact, how the macro and micro of society interact, how
    society evolves and oscillates. The history of culture, the history
    of values and how people have lived their lives. How economics plays
    a role in this as well. This is basically the nature of humanity and
    the human experience. All these very deep issues.

-   Cognitive Dissonance and the value system. Why do people break a
    value system. The psychology of sin, the psychology of depth – why
    even people who have it don’t always have it.

-   The theory of halacha: why is it the way it is. How does it work,
    why this is the absolute. What discrete laws do better than general
    ones relating this to the absolute.

-   The theory of movements. How have they spread, how are they accepted
    by different people, what is the path from initial conception to
    physical action.

-   Ephemeral vs Practically Infinite Change: iterative processes,
    changing face versus changing core.

-   Theory of reality: what revolutions mean, even if they accomplish
    their goals, is the change real or is it synthetic? Is the change
    better for society in an absolute term or just in the eyes of the
    revolutionary figure? Would it have been better to let society go on
    a natural course?

-   The psychology of opposition: How do you approach opposition in
    theory and practice (taking into account the psychology of
    the opposition). How do you navigate through a field of mines, how
    do you break down barriers in change, how do you create a
    pluralistic society and not impose things.

-   Misinterpretation of Movement: when the theory/movement takes on a
    new identity created for it by the public because of their
    own psychology. This is the question of **how do general societal
    trends emerge from the level of the individual?**

-   The presence of reality in all of this, all its economical,
    physical, and emotional hardships. When things do not go well, when
    we are not in good situations. How can we be more open about talking
    about evil? How do we integrate this into the theory.

-   How do two groups or individuals which fundamentally disagree with
    each-other interact?

-   We must take present, past and future into account. What are the
    predicted future dynamics of change. How does change happen.

-   We must also look into the theory of societal organization. How do
    countries emerge, what is the psychology of nationalism, of the
    nation, the philosophy of government and of leadership.

-   How good ideas can be defiled and made evil, how ideas develop and
    are touched by different people, how people accept ideas, and then
    going into the cognitive depth of their consciousness in relation to
    these ideas.

-   Understanding the relationship between human beings and
    deep thinking. That entropy is not on our side and we converge to a
    stable minimum of subjective fields and cognitive depth. It is very
    hard to stay thinking deeply and to get there in the first place is
    harder yet because the difference is intangible. That one
    subjectivity is infinitely greater is a very hard realization to
    come to and even harder to adhere to it.

-   The psychology and theory of what life, values, goals actually means
    to people. How do we look at the distribution of all these things in
    a society? How do we understand what level of depth people
    actually have. What do people want out of life? Why do we see
    certain trends. How do we make these changes? We can’t change faces
    we need to change cores.

-   **The phenomenon of societal phase changes:** both when the face of
    society itself undergoes a phase change or some process that emerges
    from society

We can use the theory of network computation, information flow, and
topology evolution to answer these questions.

Emotion:
========

An essential element of being human.

These are observations not prescriptions. Take with a grain of salt

1.  **Not thinking about something doesn’t make it disappear:** mystery
    can be better than confirmation of facts. This is an observation,
    not a prescription

2.  **Having periods of existential thinking is inevitable in thinking
    man:** the state of mental life can oscillate up and down between
    depression and eureka. I believe this is normal, at least for me
    there is no constant mental state. But I don’t want to generalize
    too much from my own emotional experiences here so I won’t give any
    more emotional advice until I can add more nuance. Otherwise it just
    seems like the kind of uselss sayings on the back of cereal boxes.

3.  **Know who you are and what your ability ought to be;** do not have
    absolute expectations for yourself, do not put yourself on an
    absolute scale, know your self-estimation will be off.

4.  **A balance of emotions is important** (Aristotle)

5.  **Can’t reliably estimate how our preent behaviors will impact our
    future action**

On Practicing Ideas From Thoughtbook
====================================

My biggest fear relating to these ideas is that they will sit in the
dust and not have an impact on our thinking and ultimately on depth of
our mental lives and our relationships with ourselves, other people and
nature. How the thoughts are presented is vital to the thoughtbook
actually adding value to humans and to society in practice.

There are three problems with applying the thoughtbook:

1.  Doing so takes time and deliberate effort

2.  Is not immediately valuable to people / most will be uninterested
    because have life. Only to a small set of early adopters

3.  Cognitive Load Threshhold means practically it is impossible to
    solve all these problems

Implicit Issues:

-   What does it mean that the Thoughtbook cannot be *perfectly*
    applied?

-   What does it mean that most people live their lives while *falling*
    for what the Thoughtbook warns against?

-   What is the predicted impact the Thoughtbook could actually make in
    society?

-   How valuable can these ideas be to people?

-   What depth have I not added to these ideas – what would a deeper
    thinker add to them?

The End of the Beginning
========================

These pages are beginning to flow with ideas. It is necessary to begin
revisiting these ideas to refine or destroy them, to create overarching
structure and add nuance, detail, and actionable insight to these ideas
and place them in a continuum. Doing this would mature the theory and
make it more well defined, give it an identity.

In absolute terms, this theory is far eclipsed by others. However, the
fuzzy reality considered, this theory must not be looked down upon as
inferior, rather as an essential element of the intellectual and
emotional growth of its creator. Do not assume the creator believes this
theory is ultimate – heaven forbid; the mediocrity of this theory must
be overlooked and theory itself overlooked. It is not an end but a means
to bootstrap to something greater
